A SHORT HISTORY OF THE WORLD


I
THE WORLD IN SPACE


The story of our world is a story that is still very imperfectly known.
A couple of hundred years ago men possessed the history of little more
than the last three thousand years. What happened before that time was
a matter of legend and speculation.  Over a large part of the civilized
world it was believed and taught that the world had been created
suddenly in 4004 B.C., though authorities differed as to whether this
had occurred in the spring or autumn of that year. This fantastically
precise misconception was based upon a too literal interpretation of
the Hebrew Bible, and upon rather arbitrary theological assumptions
connected therewith.  Such ideas have long since been abandoned by
religious teachers, and it is universally recognized that the universe
in which we live has to all appearances existed for an enormous period
of time and possibly for endless time.  Of course there may be
deception in these appearances, as a room may be made to seem endless
by putting mirrors facing each other at either end. But that the
universe in which we live has existed only for six or seven thousand
years may be regarded as an altogether exploded idea.

The earth, as everybody knows nowadays, is a spheroid, a sphere
slightly compressed, orange fashion, with a diameter of nearly 8,000
miles.  Its spherical shape has been known at least to a limited number
of intelligent people for nearly 2,500 years, but before that time it
was supposed to be flat, and various ideas which now seem fantastic
were entertained about its relations to the sky and the stars and
planets.  We know now that it rotates upon its axis (which is about 24
miles shorter than its equatorial diameter) every twenty-four hours,
and that this is the cause of the alternations of day and night, that
it circles about the sun in a slightly distorted and slowly variable
oval path in a year. Its distance from the sun varies between
ninety-one and a half millions at its nearest and ninety-four and a
half million miles.


LUMINOUS SPIRAL CLOUDS OF MATTER
“LUMINOUS SPIRAL CLOUDS OF MATTER”

(Nebula photographed 1910)

_Photo: G. W. Ritchey_


About the earth circles a smaller sphere, the moon, at an average
distance  of 239,000 miles. Earth and moon are not the only bodies to
travel round  the sun.  There are also the planets, Mercury and Venus,
at distances of  thirty-six and sixty-seven millions of miles; and
beyond the circle of the  earth and disregarding a belt of numerous
smaller bodies, the planetoids,  there are Mars, Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus and Neptune at mean distances of 141, 483, 886, 1,782, and 1,793
millions of miles respectively. These figures in millions of miles are
very difficult for the mind to grasp.  It may help the reader’s
imagination if we reduce the sun and planets to a smaller, more
conceivable scale.


THE NEBULA SEEN EDGE ON
THE NEBULA SEEN EDGE-ON

Note the central core which, through millions of years, is cooling to
solidity

_Photo: G. W. Ritchey_


If, then, we represent our earth as a little ball of one inch diameter,
 the sun would be a big globe nine feet across and 323 yards away, that
 is about a fifth of a mile, four or five minutes’ walking.  The  moon
would be a small pea two feet and a half from the world.  Between earth
and sun there would be the two inner planets, Mercury and Venus,  at
distances of one hundred and twenty-five and two hundred and fifty 
yards from the sun. All round and about these bodies there would be 
emptiness until you came to Mars, a hundred and seventy-five feet
beyond the earth; Jupiter nearly a mile away, a foot in diameter;
Saturn, a little smaller, two miles off; Uranus four miles off and
Neptune six miles off. Then nothingness and nothingness except for
small particles and drifting scraps of attenuated vapour for thousands
of miles.  The nearest star to earth on this scale would be 40,000
miles away.

These figures will serve perhaps to give one some conception of the
immense emptiness of space in which the drama of life goes on.

For in all this enormous vacancy of space we know certainly of life
only  upon the surface of our earth. It does not penetrate much more
than three miles down into the 4,000 miles that separate us from the
centre of our globe, and it does not reach more than five miles above
its surface.  Apparently all the limitlessness of space is otherwise
empty and dead.

The deepest ocean dredgings go down to five miles. The highest recorded
flight of an aeroplane is little more than four miles. Men have reached
to seven miles up in balloons, but at a cost of great suffering.  No
bird can fly so high as five miles, and small birds and insects which
have been carried up by aeroplanes drop off insensible far below that
level.




II
THE WORLD IN TIME


In the last fifty years there has been much very fine and interesting
speculation on the part of scientific men upon the age and origin of
our earth. Here we cannot pretend to give even a summary of such
speculations because they involve the most subtle mathematical and
physical considerations. The truth is that the physical and
astronomical sciences are still too undeveloped as yet to make anything
of the sort more than an illustrative guesswork. The general tendency
has been to make the estimated age of our globe longer and longer. It
now seems probable that the earth has had an independent existence as a
spinning planet flying round and round the sun for a longer period than
2,000,000,000 years. It may have been much longer than that. This is a
length of time that absolutely overpowers the imagination.

Before that vast period of separate existence, the sun and earth and
the other planets that circulate round the sun may have been a great
swirl of diffused matter in space.  The telescope reveals to us in
various parts of the heavens luminous spiral clouds of matter, the
spiral nebulæ, which appear to be in rotation about a centre. It is
supposed by many astronomers that the sun and its planets were once
such a spiral, and that their matter has undergone concentration into
its present form. Through majestic æons that concentration went on
until in that vast remoteness of the past for which we have given
figures, the world and its moon were distinguishable.  They were
spinning then much faster than they are spinning now; they were at a
lesser distance from the sun; they travelled round it very much faster,
and they were probably incandescent or molten at the surface.  The sun
itself was a much greater blaze in the heavens.

THE GREAT SPIRAL NEBULA
THE GREAT SPIRAL NEBULA

_Photo: G. W. Ritchey_

If we could go back through that infinitude of time and see the earth
in this earlier stage of its history, we should behold a scene more
like the interior of a blast furnace or the surface of a lava flow
before it cools and cakes over than any other contemporary scene.  No
water would be visible because all the water there was would still be
superheated steam in a stormy atmosphere of sulphurous and metallic
vapours.  Beneath this would swirl and boil an ocean of molten rock
substance.  Across a sky of fiery clouds the glare of the hurrying sun
and moon would sweep swiftly like hot breaths of flame.

A DARK NEBULA
A DARK NEBULA
_Taken in 1920 with the aid of the largest telescope in the world. One
of the first photographs taken by the Mount Wilson telescope._

There are dark nebulæ and bright nebulæ.  Prof. Henry Norris Russell,
against the British theory, holds that the dark nebulæ preceded the
bright nebulæ.

_Photo: Prof. Hale_


Slowly by degrees as one million of years followed another, this fiery
scene would lose its eruptive incandescence.  The vapours in the sky
would rain down and become less dense overhead; great slaggy cakes of
solidifying rock would appear upon the surface of the molten sea, and
sink under it, to be replaced by other floating masses.  The sun and
moon growing now each more distant and each smaller, would rush with
diminishing swiftness across the heavens. The moon now, because of its
smaller size, would be already cooled far below incandescence, and
would be alternately obstructing and reflecting the sunlight in a
series of eclipses and full moons.


ANOTHER SPIRAL NEBULA
ANOTHER SPIRAL NEBULA

_Photo: G. W. Ritchey_

And so with a tremendous slowness through the vastness of time, the
earth would grow more and more like the earth on which we live, until
at last an age would come when, in the cooling air, steam would begin
to condense into clouds, and the first rain would fall hissing upon the
first rocks below.  For endless millenia the greater part of the
earth’s water would still be vaporized in the atmosphere, but there
would now be hot streams running over the crystallizing rocks below and
pools and lakes into which these streams would be carrying detritus and
depositing sediment.


LANDSCAPE BEFORE LIFE
LANDSCAPE BEFORE LIFE
“Great lava-like masses of rock without traces of soil”


At last a condition of things must have been attained in which a man
might have stood up on earth and looked about him and lived. If we
could have visited the earth at that time we should have stood on great
lava-like masses of rock without a trace of soil or touch of living
vegetation, under a storm-rent sky.  Hot and violent winds, exceeding
the fiercest tornado that ever blows, and downpours of rain such as our
milder, slower earth to-day knows nothing of, might have assailed us. 
The water of the downpour would have rushed by us, muddy with the
spoils of the rocks, coming together into torrents, cutting deep gorges
and canyons as they hurried past to deposit their sediment in the
earliest seas.  Through the clouds we should have glimpsed a great sun
moving visibly across the sky, and in its wake and in the wake of the
moon would have come a diurnal tide of earthquake and upheaval. And

the moon, which nowadays keeps one constant face to earth, would then
have been rotating visibly and showing the side it now hides so
inexorably.

The earth aged.  One million years followed another, and the day
lengthened, the sun grew more distant and milder, the moon’s pace in
the sky slackened; the intensity of rain and storm diminished and the
water in the first seas increased and ran together into the ocean
garment our planet henceforth wore.

But there was no life as yet upon the earth; the seas were lifeless,
and the rocks were barren.




III
THE BEGINNINGS OF LIFE


As everybody knows nowadays, the knowledge we possess of life before
the beginnings of human memory and tradition is derived from the
markings and fossils of living things in the stratified rocks. We find
preserved in shale and slate, limestone, and sandstone, bones, shells,
fibres, stems, fruits, footmarks, scratchings and the like, side by
side with the ripple marks of the earliest tides and the pittings of
the earliest rain-falls. It is by the sedulous examination of this
Record of the Rocks that the past history of the earth’s life has been
pieced together.  That much nearly everybody knows to-day.  The
sedimentary rocks do not lie neatly stratum above stratum; they have
been crumpled, bent, thrust about, distorted and mixed together like
the leaves of a library that has been repeatedly looted and burnt, and
it is only as a result of many devoted lifetimes of work that the
record has been put into order and read.  The whole compass of time
represented by the record of the rocks is now estimated as
1,600,000,000 years.

The earliest rocks in the record are called by geologists the Azoic
rocks, because they show no traces of life.  Great areas of these Azoic
rocks lie uncovered in North America, and they are of such a thickness
that geologists consider that they represent a period of at least half
of the 1,600,000,000 which they assign to the whole geological record. 
Let me repeat this profoundly significant fact. Half the great interval
of time since land and sea were first distinguishable on earth has left
us no traces of life.  There are ripplings and rain marks still to be
found in these rocks, but no marks nor vestiges of any living thing.

MARINE LIFE IN THE CAMBRIAN PERIOD
MARINE LIFE IN THE CAMBRIAN PERIOD
1 and 8, Jellyfishes;  2, Hyolithes (swimming snail);  3, Humenocaris; 
4, Protospongia; 5, Lampshells (Obolella);  6, Orthoceras;  7,
Trilobite (Paradoxides) — see fossil on page 13; 9, Coral
(Archæocyathus);  10, Bryograptus;  11, Trilobite (Olenellus); 12,
Palesterina


Then, as we come up the record, signs of past life appear and increase.
 The age of the world’s history in which we find these past traces is
called by geologists the Lower Palæozoic age. The first indications
that life was astir are vestiges of comparatively simple and lowly
things: the shells of small shellfish, the stems and flowerlike heads
of zoophytes, seaweeds and the tracks and remains of sea worms and
crustacea.  Very early appear certain creatures rather like plant-lice,
crawling creatures which could roll themselves up into balls as the
plant-lice do, the trilobites.  Later by a few million years or so come
certain sea scorpions, more mobile and powerful creatures than the
world had ever seen before.


FOSSIL TRILOBITE (SLIGHTLY MAGNIFIED)
FOSSIL TRILOBITE (SLIGHTLY MAGNIFIED)
_Photo: John J. Ward, F.E.S._


None of these creatures were of very great size.  Among the largest
were certain of the sea scorpions, which measured nine feet in length. 
There are no signs whatever of land life of any sort, plant or animal;
there are no fishes nor any vertebrated creatures in this part of the
record.  Essentially all the plants and creatures which have left us
their traces from this period of the earth’s history are shallow-water
and intertidal beings.  If we wished to parallel the flora and fauna of
the Lower Palæozoic rocks on the earth to-day, we should do it best,
except in the matter of size, by taking a drop of water from a rock
pool or scummy ditch and examining it under a microscope.  The little
crustacea, the small shellfish, the zoophytes and algæ we should find
there would display a quite striking resemblance to these clumsier,
larger prototypes that once were the crown of life upon our planet.


EARLY PALÆOLITHIC FOSSILS OF VARIOUS SPECIES OF LINGULA
EARLY PALÆOLITHIC FOSSILS OF VARIOUS SPECIES OF LINGULA

Species of this most ancient genus of shellfish still live to-day

_(In Natural History Museum, London)_


It is well, however, to bear in mind that the Lower Palæozoic rocks
probably do not give us anything at all representative of the first
beginnings of life on our planet. Unless a creature has bones or other
hard parts, unless it wears a shell or is big enough and heavy enough
to make characteristic footprints and trails in mud, it is unlikely to
leave any fossilized traces of its existence behind.  To-day there are
hundreds of thousands of species of small soft-bodied creatures in our
world which it is inconceivable can ever leave any mark for future
geologists to discover.  In the world’s past, millions of millions of
species of such creatures may have lived and multiplied and flourished
and passed away without a trace remaining.  The waters of the warm and
shallow lakes and seas of the so-called Azoic period may have teemed
with an infinite variety of lowly, jelly-like, shell-less and boneless
creatures, and a multitude of green scummy plants may have spread over
the sunlit intertidal rocks and beaches.  The Record of the Rocks is no
more a complete record of life in the past than the books of a bank are
a record of the existence of everybody in the neighbourhood.  It is
only when a species begins to secrete a shell or a spicule or a
carapace or a lime-supported stem, and so put by something for the
future, that it goes upon the Record.  But in rocks of an age prior to
those which bear any fossil traces, graphite, a form of uncombined
carbon, is sometimes found, and some authorities consider that it may
have been separated out from combination through the vital activities
of unknown living things.


 FOSSILIZED FOOTPRINTS OF A LABYRINTHODONT CHEIROTHERIUM
FOSSILIZED FOOTPRINTS OF A LABYRINTHODONT CHEIROTHERIUM

_(In Natural History Museum, London)_
